For Underexplored Therapeutics/Prophylactics: Interactions with Innate Immune Response (TLR agonists/antagonists & BCG trained immunity) (#408)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/20.treatments.md

Given the cytokine storm that results from immune system activation in response to the virus, which has been implicated in worsening of the disease, a neutralizing antibody (nAb) may be preferable.
Upcoming work may explore the specificity of nAbs for their target, mechanisms by which the nAbs impede the virus, and improvements to antibody structure that may enhance the ability of the antibody to block viral activity.

There is also some research into possible potential therapeutics or prophylactics which interact with components of the innate immune response.

> Broadly, there are a variety of toll-like receptors which are examples of pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), innate immune response components which recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Broadly, there are a variety of toll-like receptors (TLRs) which are examples of pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), innate immune response components which recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs).
```

> Note that Toll-like receptors form a part of innate immune recognition and can more generally contribute to promoting both innate and adaptive responses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that TLRs form a part of innate immune recognition and can more generally contribute to promoting both innate and adaptive responses.
```

In a recent review [@doi:10.1038/s41577-020-0285-6], trained immunity was defined as forms of memory which are temporary (e.g., months or years, and reversible), displayed by innate immune cells and innate immune features of other cells, displayed as increased responsiveness to future same or heterologous pathogen infection or sometimes decreased responsiveness or immunological tolerance, and established through epigenetic and metabolic mechanisms; the review also notes various ways in which trained immunity may be related to pathology, inflammatory-related diseases, conditions and immunology associated with aging, and cancer.
One type of stimulus which research indicates can induce trained immunity is BCG vaccination (BCG is an acronym for bacillus Calmette-Guerin).
BCG is a live attenuated strain derived from an isolate of Mycobacterium bovis with the common reason for application being prevention of tuberculosis in humans.

> With respect to SARS-CoV-2 specifically, clinical trials in non-SARS-CoV-2-infected adults have been setup to assess the possible efficacy of BCG vaccination.

Author: I chose the vague "efficacy" b/c I meant 2 ways in which it might be effective: (1) reduce susceptibility / prevent infection / ~ prophylaxis and (2) reduce disease severity / partial therapeutic. So, if you think it's better, we could write "assess BCG vaccination as a potential prophylactic and/or partial therapeutic." ??
(Note, I already mentioned in an earlier line above the other possible wording which is closer to what I saw in article "... might be shown to generate heterologous protective effects with respect to SARS-CoV-2 susceptibility or severity".)

> With respect to SARS-CoV-2 specifically, clinical trials in non-SARS-CoV-2-infected adults have been setup to assess the possible efficacy of BCG vaccination.

Reviewer: Ah, if you would be open to the "potential prophylactic and/or partial therapeutic phrasing," I think that would really help people like me who don't know much about this!

> Some trials enroll healthcare workers, other trials hospitalized elderly adults without immunosuppression who get vaccinated with placebo or BCG at hospital discharge, and yet another set of trials older adults (>50 years) under chronic care for conditions like hypertension and diabetes.

Author: @rando2 (side-note: I didn't realize before that I had access to change the files; recently I saw how to do it, so i can do more of the editing steps now rather than asking you to do more in addition to everything else you do!)
I used present tense as a shortcut way to cover trials at different steps (those that enrolled or enrolling, those that started or still going or will start, etc. -- it's also a bit different than the therapeutic trials).
Reminder for me: I can still/will incorporate your suggestion to start the last comma clause with "and still others" instead of "and yet another set of trials"

> Some trials enroll healthcare workers, other trials hospitalized elderly adults without immunosuppression who get vaccinated with placebo or BCG at hospital discharge, and yet another set of trials older adults (>50 years) under chronic care for conditions like hypertension and diabetes.

Reviewer: Grammar is so hard in these contexts! My gut likes "are enrolling" but I think you're right that it implies they are still in the enrollment phase more than "enroll" does!

> One set of trials for example has time until first infection as the primary study endpoint; more generally, outcomes measured in some of these trials are related to incidence of disease and disease severity or symptoms.

Author: I'll use this correction except for "commonly"; "generally" works better because time until first infection is sort of related to inverse of incidence at least on some theoretical level although I'm not sure if I read the exact calculations used (I read enough to write what I wrote).

> An article [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042] that very briefly summarizes the setup of these trials also mentions some data analyses which showed possible correlations between countries which have more BCG vaccination (or BCG vaccination policies) and the severity of COVID-19 in those countries, but (1) it is unclear whether this correlation indicates an interaction because for example of many other possible factors or confounding factors (country age distribution, detection efficiency, stochastic epidemic dynamic effects, differences in healthcare capacity over time in relation to epidemic dynamics, many other mundane factors) and (2) also it is unclear what is the relation between BCG vaccination at different ages and at longer times before the start of the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic and BCG vaccination at different ages during the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic at shorter times before the risk of possible infection; at least some of these considerations are also made or pointed out in the data analyses sited and in the article.

Author: i don't think "mundane" is typical outside of philosophizing english teachers or other esoteric examples ;-)

> An article [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042] that very briefly summarizes the setup of these trials also mentions some data analyses which showed possible correlations between countries which have more BCG vaccination (or BCG vaccination policies) and the severity of COVID-19 in those countries, but (1) it is unclear whether this correlation indicates an interaction because for example of many other possible factors or confounding factors (country age distribution, detection efficiency, stochastic epidemic dynamic effects, differences in healthcare capacity over time in relation to epidemic dynamics, many other mundane factors) and (2) also it is unclear what is the relation between BCG vaccination at different ages and at longer times before the start of the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic and BCG vaccination at different ages during the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic at shorter times before the risk of possible infection; at least some of these considerations are also made or pointed out in the data analyses sited and in the article.

Author: - your re-wording of 2nd point covers everything / is more general, though I did mean something specific; I think your more wording may be better than mine because it covers several possibilities.
- i don't think "mundane" is a typical word! I sort of meant that I listed obviously possibly related factors but sometimes you also find factors that aren't obviously related, but I don't have enough experience to have an intuition or estimate of how often that is. So we can either just say "and other factors" removing the "mundane" or we can remove last comma clause and put "and" before "differences".

> An article [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042] that very briefly summarizes the setup of these trials also mentions some data analyses which showed possible correlations between countries which have more BCG vaccination (or BCG vaccination policies) and the severity of COVID-19 in those countries, but (1) it is unclear whether this correlation indicates an interaction because for example of many other possible factors or confounding factors (country age distribution, detection efficiency, stochastic epidemic dynamic effects, differences in healthcare capacity over time in relation to epidemic dynamics, many other mundane factors) and (2) also it is unclear what is the relation between BCG vaccination at different ages and at longer times before the start of the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic and BCG vaccination at different ages during the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic at shorter times before the risk of possible infection; at least some of these considerations are also made or pointed out in the data analyses sited and in the article.

Reviewer: That sounds good to me!

The article [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042] also includes various related considerations (generally related animal and human studies, general safety, specific possible safety considerations with respect to SARS-CoV-2).

> Additionally, we review here one of the most important considerations: severe SARS-CoV-2 has been characterized so far to possibly exhibit dysregulated immune responses and whether or when some immune responses are protective or pathogenic is still under research (e.g., [@doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.04.009; @doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.009; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042; @doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.008]); also, trained immunity itself may sometimes be related to either balanced, or too much or too little, or useful or harmful immunological responses.

Reviewer: Note: I did not look up these papers but this seems reasonable!

> Additionally, we review here one of the most important considerations: severe SARS-CoV-2 has been characterized so far to possibly exhibit dysregulated immune responses and whether or when some immune responses are protective or pathogenic is still under research (e.g., [@doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.04.009; @doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.009; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042; @doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.008]); also, trained immunity itself may sometimes be related to either balanced, or too much or too little, or useful or harmful immunological responses.

Author: For breaking up the sentence, we can just remove the semi-colon & make it 2 sentences instead of 1 -- i think that's simpler than verifying whether our two versions of the 2nd clause are the biologically same. I like the sentence you added afterwards -- it puts additional useful points to what I wrote.
*Reminder* to partly incorporate feedback.

> The article [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042] proposes that trained immunity might lead to an earlier stronger response which could reduce viremia and avoid (possibly with the additional support of another therapeutic administered later) the later detrimental immunopathology seen with severe cases; while this is a possibility, additional research is required to assess its validity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The article [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042] proposes that trained immunity, possibly with the subsequent administration of an additional therapeutic, might lead to an earlier and stronger response, which could reduce viremia and avoid the later detrimental immunopathology seen in severe COVID-19 cases.
While this is a possibility, additional research is required to assess its validity.
```

Author: I need to work on making this sentence clearer while keeping the detail of timing / different roles for different therapeutics and different stages/progression of disease... Either I find a way to write what I wrote more clearly while keeping the points I wanted, or I'll keep the original (less clear) wording. *Reminder* to keep working on making clearer.

Reviewer: @yemarshall I was wondering if you're still working on this? I wasn't sure based on your comments this weekend.

Therefore, TLR agonists and antagonists hold some potential for broad-spectrum prophylaxis.
Another type of approach which is being investigated is the possible use of what is termed trained immunity, in particular as elicited by non-SARS-CoV-2 whole-microorganism vaccines (or other microbial stimuli), as a tool which might be shown to generate heterologous protective effects with respect to SARS-CoV-2 susceptibility or severity [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042].
In a recent review [@doi:10.1038/s41577-020-0285-6], trained immunity was defined as forms of memory which are temporary (e.g., months or years, and reversible), displayed by innate immune cells and innate immune features of other cells, displayed as increased responsiveness to future same or heterologous pathogen infection or sometimes decreased responsiveness or immunological tolerance, and established through epigenetic and metabolic mechanisms.
One type of stimulus which research indicates can induce trained immunity is bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccination.
BCG is an attenuated form of bacteria _Mycobacterium bovis_.
The vaccine is most commonly administered for the prevention of tuberculosis in humans.

> With respect to SARS-CoV-2 specifically, clinical trials in non-SARS-CoV-2-infected adults have been setup to assess the possible efficacy of BCG vaccination (e.g., to assess if it may be effective as a potential prophylactic or potential partial prophylactic in (1) reducing susceptibility / preventing infection and (2) reducing disease severity).

Reviewer: @cgreene caught that we don't have these clinical trials identifiers cited anywhere -- it doesn't matter whether it's here in this sentence or later in the text, but we definitely need to reference them somewhere

Author: I incorporated the NCT# references in the latest file & also (again) with the article reference because it describes some of those trials plus some other trials.

The article [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042] also includes various related considerations such as efficacy in related animal and human studies and the safety of the vaccine, both generally and specifically with respect to SARS-CoV-2.

> Additionally, we review here one of the most important considerations: severe SARS-CoV-2 has been characterized so far to possibly exhibit dysregulated immune responses and whether or when some immune responses are protective or pathogenic is still under research (e.g., [@doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.04.009; @doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.009; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042; @doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.008]); also, trained immunity itself may sometimes be related to either balanced, or too much or too little, or useful or harmful immunological responses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, we review here one of the most important considerations: severe SARS-CoV-2 has been characterized so far to possibly exhibit dysregulated immune responses and whether or when some immune responses are protective or pathogenic is still under research (e.g., [@doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.04.009; @doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.009; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.042; @doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.008]).
Trained immunity itself may sometimes also be related to either balanced, hyperactive, or hypoactive immune responses, which can correspond to useful or harmful modulation of the immunological response.
This approach should therefore be used carefully in a disease where too weak or too strong of an immune response could both be associated with increased risk.
```
Hi @yemarshall, I tried to modify this in line with your comments above, but I think the middle sentence (after the semicolon part) does need a little bit of finessing because there are so many "or"s in a row! Perhaps something like this might help? I think breaking it up into direction (balanced, accelerated, decelerated) vs effect (harmful, useful) might help make it easier to follow.

Author: All the sentences are related to a very important type of consideration for COVID-19/SARS-CoV-2, so splitting it up into multiple sentences risks losing the aspect that all these points are part this type of consideration. I know grammatically it can be equivalent -- but I wanted to make sure to increase the chances that the reader gets the meaning.

Author: Also, though earlier I noted that I liked the sound of your last added sentence suggestion -- we already made that point in general in immunology background so I preferred to not add it here and risk making a mistake.

Given the cytokine storm that results from immune system activation in response to the virus, which has been implicated in worsening of the disease, a neutralizing antibody (nAb) may be preferable.
Upcoming work may explore the specificity of nAbs for their target, mechanisms by which the nAbs impede the virus, and improvements to antibody structure that may enhance the ability of the antibody to block viral activity.

There is also some research into possible potential therapeutics or prophylactics which interact with components of the innate immune response.
For example, there are a variety of toll-like receptors (TLRs) which are examples of pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), innate immune response components which recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs).

> Note that TLRs form a part of innate immune recognition and can more generally contribute to promoting both innate and adaptive responses [@ISBN: 9780815332183].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that TLRs form a part of innate immune recognition and can more generally contribute to promoting both innate and adaptive responses [@ISBN:9780815332183].
```
